lookup join docs (#124531)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-lookup-join.md

Teams often have data scattered across multiple indices – like logs, IPs, user IDs, hosts, employees etc. Without a direct way to enrich or correlate each event with reference data, root-cause analysis, security checks, and operational insights become time-consuming.

For example, you can use `LOOKUP JOIN` to:

* Retrieve environment or ownership details for each host to correlate your metrics data.
* Quickly see if any source IPs match known malicious addresses.
* Tag logs with the owning team or escalation info for faster triage and incident response.

[`LOOKUP join`](/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-commands.md#esql-lookup-join) is similar to [`ENRICH`](/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-commands.md#esql-enrich) in the fact that they both help you join data together. You should use `LOOKUP JOIN` when:

* Your enrichment data changes frequently
* You want to avoid index-time processing
* You're working with regular indices
* You need to preserve distinct matches
* You need to match on any field in a lookup index
* You use document or field level security

> * You want to restrict users to a specific lookup indices that they can you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You want to restrict users to specific lookup indices that they can use
```

## How the `LOOKUP JOIN` command works [esql-how-lookup-join-works]

The `LOOKUP JOIN` command adds new columns to a table, with data from {{es}} indices.

:::{image} ../../../images/esql-lookup-join.png
:alt: esql lookup join
:::

`<lookup_index>`
: The name of the lookup index. This must be a specific index name - wildcards, aliases, and remote cluster references are not supported.

`<field_name>`
: The field to join on. This field must exist in both your current query results and in the lookup index. If the field contains multi-valued entries, those entries will not match anything (the added fields will contain `null` for those rows).

## Example

> `LOOKUP JOIN` has left-join behavior. If no rows match in the looked index, `LOOKUP JOIN` retains the incoming row and adds `null`s. If many rows in the lookedup index match, `LOOKUP JOIN` adds one row per match.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`LOOKUP JOIN` has left-join behavior. If no rows match in the lookup index, `LOOKUP JOIN` retains the incoming row and adds `null`s. If multiple rows in the lookup index match, `LOOKUP JOIN` adds one row per match.
```

|5||Atlantis|
|[6\|7]|Mv-Lang|Mv-Land|
|[7\|8]|Mv-Lang2|Mv-Land2|
|Null-Lang|Null-Land|
|Null-Lang2|Null-Land2|

Running the following query would provide the results shown below.

```esql
FROM employees
| EVAL language_code = emp_no % 10
| LOOKUP JOIN languages_lookup_non_unique_key ON language_code
| WHERE emp_no > 10090 AND emp_no < 10096
| SORT emp_no, country
| KEEP emp_no, language_code, language_name, country;
```

|emp_no|language_code|language_name|country|
|---|---|---|---|
|    10091      | 1                     | English               | Canada|
|    10091      | 1                     | null                  | United Kingdom|
|    10091      | 1                     | English               | United States of America|
|    10091      | 1                     | English               | null|
|    10092      | 2                     | German                | [Germany, Austria]|
|    10092      | 2                     | German                | Switzerland|
|    10092      | 2                     | German                | null|
|    10093      | 3                     | null                  | null|
|    10094      | 4                     | Quenya                | null|

> |    10095      | 5                     | null                  | Atlantis|

Reviewer: Thank you for including the example from the docs. In a follow-up, maybe we want to construct a nicer example for the docs? (We used to place such examples in `docs.csv-spec`.) Then readers won't have to wonder why we include Atlantis or the elven language of Quenya :D

Author: If you think it would be cleaner, I just just replace those values with something more realistic @alex-spies

Reviewer 2: 👍 on having better sample data that ties to the existing sample data in Kibana (which can have its own separate section).
